The PSALMS of DAVID
Imitated in the Language of the
NEW TESTAMENT
And applied to the
Christian STATE and WORSHIP
By I. WATTS, D.D.

The Twenty Second Editon

Luke xxiv. 44. All hings must be fulfilled which were written in—the Psalms concerning me.

Heb xi. 32—David, Samuel, and the Prophets. Ver. 40—That they without us should not be made perfect.

ADVERTISEMENT
to the
READERS
On the following HEADS.

Of the different Editions of this Book.

The larger edition is prefaced with a discourse on the right way of fitting the Psalms of David for Christian worship; wherein a plain account is given of the author's general conduct in this imitation of the psalms, together with some evident and convincing arguments to support it. There are also particular notes added to the end of a great number of the psalms, which explain their evangelical sense, and shew the reason why they are either paraphrased or abridged in such a manner here.

At the request of many friends, the author has permitted this edition in a smaller form, to render it more portable and convenient for public worship; he therefore desires, and may reasonably demand this piece of justice of all his readers, that they will not censure and condemn any part of this work, without a diligent perusal of the larger edition, wherein the preface and notes, in the judgment of many learned and pious men, have given a sufficient vindication of the whole performance.

Of the Use of this Psalm-Book.

The chief design of this work was to improve psalmody or religious singing, and to encourage the frequent practice of it in public assemblies and private families with with more honour and delight; yet the author hopes the reading of it may also entertain the parlour and the closet with devout pleasure and holy meditations. Therefore he would request his readers, and proper seasons to peruse it through; and among 340 sacred hymns, they may find out several that suit their own case and temper, or the circumstances of their families and friends; they may teach their children such as are proper for their age, and by treasuring them up in their memory, they may be furnished with pious retirement, or may entertain they friends with holy melody.

Of Chusing or finding the Psalm

The perusal of the whole book will acquaint every reader with the author's method, and by consulting the index or table of contents at the end, he my find hymns very proper for many occasions of the Christian life and worship; though no copy of David's Psalter can provide or all, as I have shewn in the preface.

Or if he remembers the first line of any psalm, the table of the first lines will direct where to find it.

Or if any shall think it best to sing all the psalms in order in churches or families, it may be done with profit; provided those psalms be omitted that refer to special occurrences of nations, churches, or single Christians.

Of naming the psalms.

Let the number of the psalm be named distinctly, together with the particular metre, and particular part of it: As for instance; let us sing the 33d psalm, a part, common metre; or, let us sing the 91st psalm, 1st part, beginning at the pause or ending at the pause; or, let us sing the 84th psalm as the 148th psalm, &c. And then read over the first stanza before you begin to sing, that the people may find it in their books, whether you sing with or without reading line by line. 

Of dividing the Psalm.

If the psalm be too long for the time or custom or singing, there are pauses in many of them at which you may properly rest: Or you may leave out those verses with are included in crotchets [] without disturbing the sense: Or in some places you may begin to sing at a pause.

Do not always confine yourselves to six stanzas, but sing seven or eight, rather than confound the sense, and abuse the psalm in solemn worship.

Of the manner of singing.  

It were to be wished that all congregations and private families would sing as they do in foreign Protestant countries, without reading line by line. Though the author has done what he could to make the sense complete in every line or two, yet many inconveniences will always attend this unhappy manner of singing: but where it cannot be altered, these two things may give some relief.

First, Let as many as can do it, bring Psalm-books with them, and look on the words while they sing, so far as to make the sense complete.

Second, Let the clerk read the whole psalm over aloud before he begins to parcel out the lines, that the people may some notion of what they sing; and not be forced to dray on heavily through eight tedious syllables without any meaning, till the next lines come to give the sense of them.

It were to be wished also that we might not dwell so long upon every single note, and produce the syllables to such a tiresome extent with a constant uniformity of time; which disgraces the music, and puts the congregation quite out of breath in singing five or six stanzas: Whereas, if the method of singing were but reformed to a greater speed of pronunciation, we might often enjoy the pleasure of a longer psalm with less expence of time and breath; and our psalmody would be more agreeable to that of the antient churches, more intelligible to others, and more delightful to ourselves.

December 1st 1718